---
title: 'Patent on Flashcards Becomes Active'
date: 2020-01-02T04:06:00+01:00
draft: false
---

RELATED APPLICATIONS*   The present application is a continuation of U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11/900,989, filed Sep. 14, 2007, entitled “ELECTRONIC FLASHCARDS,” naming Victoria A. Tucci as the inventor, and having attorney docket number TUCI-P002, which claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 60/963,342, filed Aug. 2, 2007, entitled “INTERACTIVE LEARNING TOOL AND ELECTRONIC FLASH CARDS,” naming Vicci Tucci as the inventor, assigned to the assignee of the present invention, and having attorney docket number TUCI-P001.PRO. These applications are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety and for all purposes.
    
*   The present application is related to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11/900,953, filed Sep. 14, 2007, entitled “INTERACTIVE EDUCATIONAL TOOL,” naming Victoria A. Tucci as the inventor, assigned to the assignee of the present invention, and having attorney docket number TUCI-P001. That application is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety and for all purposes.
    
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION*   Flash cards are often used to memorize or otherwise learn information. For example, a term may be written on the front side of a conventional flash card and a definition of the term may be written on the back side. As such, a user can flip the card back and forth to test the user's knowledge of the term and/or definition.
    
*   To improve upon conventional flash cards and provide users guidance in using the flash cards, SAFMEDS cards were developed. Conventional SAFMEDS cards are paper cards with writing on both sides similar to a conventional flash card, thereby enabling a user to flip each SAFMEDS card to learn the information written on the SAFMEDS cards. However, SAFMEDS cards are intended to be used in a specific manner as indicated by the phrase “say all fast one minute every day shuffled,” from which the “SAFMEDS” acronym was derived. As such, users should go through all SAFMEDS cards in the SAFMEDS deck quickly using brief sessions of approximately one minute. The sessions should be performed often, with at least one session per day. Additionally, the cards should be shuffled before each of the sessions.
    
*   Despite their popularity, conventional flashcards and conventional SAFMEDS cards require a significant amount of time and effort to create. Conventional flash cards and SAFMEDS cards are also susceptible to damage, loss and theft. Additionally, SAFMEDS cards are difficult to shuffle, especially when a large SAFMEDS deck is used. Further, the use of a SAFMEDS deck with a large number of SAFMEDS cards increases the length of review sessions and makes it more difficult to learn more troublesome material.
    
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION*   Accordingly, a need exists for flashcards which can be created with less time and effort. Additionally, a need exists for a flashcard system which is less susceptible to damage, loss, and theft. A need also exists for SAFMEDS cards which are easier to shuffle. Further, a need exists for SAFMEDS cards which can be reviewed in shorter review sessions and reduce the difficulty of learning more troublesome material. Embodiments of the present invention provide novel solutions to these needs and others as described below.
    
*   Embodiments are directed to graphical user interfaces, systems, and methods of implementing electronic flashcards. More specifically, embodiments provide an interface for enabling information on a selected side of an electronic flashcard (e.g., SAFMEDS card) to be displayed and hidden. For example, the information on a first side of an electronic flashcard (e.g., comprising a term, phrase, picture, etc.) may be displayed while the information on the second side is hidden, thereby enabling a user to test himself or herself before revealing the information on the second side of the electronic flashcard (e.g., comprising a definition of a term on the first side, additional information about the information on the first side, etc.). As such, the electronic flashcards are less likely to be damaged, lost, or stolen given that they are in electronic form. Additionally, the electronic flashcards enable the learning of more material or content (e.g., accessed from a local computer system presenting the electronic flashcards, accessed from a remote computer system, etc.) than conventional flashcards. Additionally, the information on each side of the electronic flashcards may be automatically generated (e.g., based upon a lesson plan of another module, based upon a user-defined subject matter, etc.) in one embodiment, thereby reducing the time and effort to create the flashcards.
    
*   The interface may also enable placement or storage of inactive electronic flashcards (e.g., which are not currently being viewed or used) in multiple piles or stacks. For example, electronic flashcards which have not yet been viewed may be displayed (e.g., stored) in a first pile (e.g., automatically as the subject matter of the flashcard is encountered during a lesson), while previously viewed flashcards may be displayed (e.g., stored) in one or more additional stacks. In one embodiment, the additional stacks may enable users to sort the electronic flashcards based upon user-confidence level with the subject matter of the flashcards, differences in the subject matter of the flashcards, etc. As such, users may separate the electronic flashcards with more difficult or troublesome subject matter, thereby enabling users to focus on the more troublesome material while devoting less attention to the material which the user is more comfortable with. Additionally, the interface may limit the number of flashcards in one or more of the stacks, thereby reducing the review time for each pile and enabling users to more quickly and easily learn the material. Further, the interface may perform automated shuffling of the electronic flashcards, thereby providing more randomized and improved shuffling over manual shuffling of conventional flashcards.
    
*   In one embodiment, a graphical user interface for implementing electronic flashcards includes a first region for displaying a first set of information associated with a predetermined subject matter (e.g., a word, a phrase, and a picture, etc.), wherein the first set of information is associated with a selected electronic flashcard. The graphical user interface also includes a second region for displaying a second set of information associated with the predetermined subject matter (e.g., a definition of the first set of information, additional information about the first set of information, etc.), wherein the second set of information is related to the first set of information and associated with a selected electronic flashcard. The second set of information remains hidden until the display of the second set of information is initiated by a user. The graphical user interface may also include a first graphical object for flipping the selected electronic flashcard, wherein the first region is further operable to display the second set of information in response to a user interaction with the first graphical object, and wherein the second region is further operable to display the first set of information in response to a user input requesting display of the first set of information. Additionally, the graphical user interface may also include a third region for displaying inactive electronic flashcards, and wherein the first set of information is displayed in the first region in response to a selection of the selected electronic flashcard from the inactive electronic flashcards displayed in the third region. The selected electronic flashcard may include a visual representation of a SAFMEDS card, and wherein the graphical user interface may further include a third region for displaying inactive electronic flashcards, wherein the third region may include a first section for displaying electronic flashcards which have not yet been accessed by a user, and wherein the third region may further include a plurality of additional sections for displaying electronic flashcards which have been previously accessed by a user.
    
*   In another embodiment, a method of implementing electronic flashcards using a graphical user interface includes displaying a first set of information associated with a predetermined subject matter while a second set of information associated with a predetermined subject matter remains hidden, wherein the first set of information is displayed in a first region of the graphical user interface, wherein the second set of information is related to the first set of information, and wherein the first and second sets of information are associated with a selected electronic flashcard. In response to a user input requesting display of the second set of information, the method also includes displaying the second set of information associated with the predetermined subject matter, wherein the second set of information is displayed on a second region of the graphical user interface. The selected electronic flashcard may include a visual representation of a SAFMEDS card, and wherein the method further includes displaying inactive electronic flashcards in a third region of the graphical user interface. The method may also include automatically hiding the second set of information after a predetermined duration following the display of the second set of information.
    
*   And in yet another embodiment, a computer system includes a processor coupled to a memory, wherein the memory includes instructions that when executed on the processor implement a method of implementing electronic flashcards using a graphical user interface, wherein the method includes displaying a first set of information associated with a predetermined subject matter while a second set of information associated with a predetermined subject matter remains hidden, wherein the first set of information is displayed in a first region of the graphical user interface, wherein the second set of information is related to the first set of information, and wherein the first and second sets of information are associated with a selected electronic flashcard. In response to a user input requesting display of the second set of information, the method also includes displaying the second set of information associated with the predetermined subject matter, wherein the second set of information is displayed on a second region of the graphical user interface. The selected electronic flashcard may include a visual representation of a SAFMEDS card, and wherein the method further includes displaying inactive electronic flashcards in a third region of the graphical user interface. The method may also include automatically hiding the second set of information after a predetermined duration following the display of the second set of information.
    
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS*   The present invention is illustrated by way of example, and not by way of limitation, in the figures of the accompanying drawings and in which like reference numerals refer to similar elements.
    
*   FIG. 1 shows an exemplary system for presenting a graphical user interface (GUI) in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 2 shows an exemplary computer system platform upon which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented.
    
*   FIG. 3 shows an exemplary on-screen GUI for implementing an exemplary interactive educational tool in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 4 shows display of exemplary information in response to interaction with a GUI in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 5 shows an exemplary user prompt for encouraging interaction with a GUI and viewing of information in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 6 shows an exemplary user prompt for encouraging interaction with a GUI and viewing of electronic flashcards in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 7 shows an exemplary GUI comprising a list of terms with respective definitions in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 8A shows an exemplary GUI for enabling users to enter and save notes in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 8B shows several exemplary notes in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 9A shows an exemplary GUI for entering answers to questions in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 9B show an exemplary GUI for comparing a user-input response with a predetermined answer in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 10 shows an exemplary GUI for displaying saved answers in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 11 shows an exemplary GUI for selecting a unit or task in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 12 shows an exemplary GUI for tracking student progress in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 13 shows an exemplary computer-implemented process for implementing an interactive education tool in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 14 shows an exemplary computer-implemented process for presenting questions and accepting user-input responses to the question in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 15 shows an exemplary GUI for listing coaches or professors in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 16 shows an exemplary GUI for enabling a student to request a session with a coach or professor in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 17 shows an exemplary GUI for enabling a coach or professor to view students and setup a session with a student in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 18A shows an exemplary GUI for initiating an observation and/or evaluation session with a student in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 18B shows an exemplary GUI for terminating an observation and/or evaluation session with a student in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 19 shows an exemplary computer-implemented process for initiating a GUI for enabling observation and evaluation of a user in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 20A shows an exemplary GUI for implementing electronic flashcards in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 20B shows an exemplary flipping of an electronic flashcard in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 20C shows an exemplary swapping of front and back sides of an electronic flashcard in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 20D shows an exemplary flipping of an electronic flashcard with front and back sides swapped in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 20E shows an exemplary stack of electronic flashcards which have reached a predetermined limit on the number of electronic flashcards in the stack in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
*   FIG. 21 shows an exemplary computer-implemented process for implementing electronic flashcards in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention.
    
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION*   Reference will now be made in detail to embodiments of the present invention, examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. While the present invention will be discussed in conjunction with the following embodiments, it will be understood that they are not intended to limit the present invention to these embodiments alone. On the contrary, the present invention is intended to cover alternatives, modifications, and equivalents which may be included with the spirit and scope of the present invention as defined by the appended claims. Furthermore, in the following detailed description of the present invention, numerous specific details are set forth in order to provide a thorough understanding of the present invention. However, embodiments of the present invention may be practiced without these specific details. In other instances, well-known methods, procedures, components, and circuits have not been described in detail so as not to unnecessarily obscure aspects of the present invention.
    
Notation and Nomenclature*   Some regions of the detailed descriptions which follow are presented in terms of procedures, logic blocks, processing and other symbolic representations of operations on data bits within a computer memory. These descriptions and representations are the means used by those skilled in the data processing arts to most effectively convey the substance of their work to others skilled in the art. In the present application, a procedure, logic block, process, or the like, is conceived to be a self-consistent sequence of steps or instructions leading to a desired result. The steps are those requiring physical manipulations of physical quantities. Usually, although not necessarily, these quantities take the form of electrical or magnetic signals capable of being stored, transferred, combined, compared, and otherwise manipulated in a computer system.
    
*   It should be borne in mind, however, that all of these and similar terms are to be associated with the appropriate physical quantities and are merely convenient labels applied to these quantities. Unless specifically stated otherwise as apparent from the following discussions, it is appreciated that throughout the present invention, discussions utilizing the terms such as “accepting,” “accessing,” “adding,” “adjusting,” “analyzing,” “applying,” “assembling,” “assigning,” “calculating,” “capturing,” “combining,” “comparing,” “collecting,” “creating,” “defining,” “depicting,” “detecting,” “determining,” “displaying,” “establishing,” “executing,” “flipping,” “generating,” “grouping,” “hiding,” “identifying,” “initiating,” “interacting,” “modifying,” “monitoring,” “moving,” “outputting,” “performing,” “placing,” “presenting,” “processing,” “programming,” “querying,” “removing,” “repeating,” “sampling,” “sorting,” “storing,” “subtracting,” “tracking,” “transforming,” “using,” or the like, refer to the action and processes of a computer system, or similar electronic computing device, that manipulates and transforms data represented as physical (electronic) quantities within the computer system's registers and memories into other data similarly represented as physical quantities within the computer system memories or registers or other such information storage, transmission or display devices.
    
System for Implementing a Graphical User Interface*   FIG. 1 shows exemplary system **100** for presenting a graphical user interface (GUI) in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 1, computer systems **110** _a_\-**110** _c_ are communicatively coupled by interface **120**. Interface **120** may comprise the internet, a network, or some other device/component for communicatively coupling computer systems **110** _a_\-**110** _c_. Additionally, computer system **110** _a_ may present GUI **130**, whereas computer system **110** _c_ may present GUI **150**. Data **140** may be accessed from computer system **110** _b_ (e.g., via interface **120**) for generating GUI **130** and/or GUI **150**, where computer system **110** _b_ may comprise a remote server in one embodiment. Alternatively, data for generating GUI **130** and/or GUI **150** may be accessed locally from a respective computer system (e.g., **110** _a_, **110** _c_, etc.), remotely from a computer system other than computer system **110** _b_, etc.
    
*   GUI **130** may comprise an interactive educational tool (e.g., as discussed with respect to FIGS. 3-14 below) for enabling users to interact with content associated with a predetermined subject matter (e.g., a topic or subject of a lesson plan selected by a user). In one embodiment, the content may comprise media (e.g., video, still images, sound, etc.) which is simultaneously displayed with text or other information associated with the predetermined subject matter. GUI **130** and/or the content presented using GUI **130** may be generated from data (e.g., **140**) accessed from a remote computer system (e.g., **110** _b_). Where interface **120** comprises the internet, the interactive educational tool implemented using GUI **130** may comprise an online interactive educational tool (e.g., presented using a web browser of computer system **110** _a_). As such, remote access of information may enable GUI **130** to present additional and/or different content compared to conventional solutions, while presentation of multiple forms of content using GUI **130** may enable users to more conveniently, effectively, and efficiently learn subject matter presented using GUI **130**.
    
*   In another embodiment, system **100** may implement a remote observation and evaluation interface (e.g., as discussed with respect to FIGS. 15-20 below) for observing and evaluating (e.g., in real-time) a student's performance when performing an action or task associated with the predetermined subject matter (e.g., presented using the interactive educational tool implemented by GUI **130** as discussed above). Computer system **110** _c_ may present video and/or audio information (e.g., using GUI **150**) of the student's performance accessed or captured using at least one interface device (e.g., a camera, microphone, etc.) coupled to computer system **110** _a_. The video and/or audio information may be communicated via a communication channel (e.g., implemented using interface **120** and/or other networking components) formed between computer systems **110** _a_ and **110** _c_. In addition to enabling observation and/or evaluation of the student, a scheduling interface may be presented to the user for scheduling the session with the professor. Further, a timing interface may be presented to the professor for enabling the professor to time the student and/or automatically bill the student based upon the duration of the session.
    
*   Alternatively, GUI **130** may comprise an interface for enabling information on a selected side of an electronic flashcard (e.g., SAFMEDS card) to be displayed and hidden. For example, the information on a first side of an electronic flashcard (e.g., comprising a term, phrase, picture, etc.) may be displayed while the information on the second side is hidden, thereby enabling a user to test himself or herself before revealing the information on the second side of the electronic flashcard (e.g., comprising a definition of a term on the first side, additional information about the information on the first side, etc.). GUI **130** may also enable placement or storage of inactive electronic flashcards (e.g., which are not currently being viewed or used) in multiple decks or piles (e.g., based upon user-confidence level with the subject matter of the flashcards, differences in the subject matter of the flashcards, etc.) to improve learning of the material (e.g., by enabling users to focus study efforts on more troublesome material of flashcards placed in a given pile). Further, GUI **130** may enable automated shuffling of the electronic flashcards, thereby providing more randomized and improved shuffling over manual shuffling of conventional flashcards.
    
*   Although FIG. 1 shows three computer systems (e.g., **110** _a_\-**110** _c_) coupled via interface **120**, it should be appreciated that a larger or smaller number of computer systems may be coupled via interface **120** in other embodiments. Additionally, it should be appreciated that interface **120** may comprise more than one component in other embodiments.
    
*   FIG. 2 shows exemplary computer system platform **200** upon which embodiments of the present invention may be implemented. As shown in FIG. 2, portions of the present invention are comprised of computer-readable and computer-executable instructions that reside, for example, in computer system platform **200** and which may be used as a part of a general purpose computer network (not shown). It is appreciated that computer system platform **200** of FIG. 2 is merely exemplary. As such, the present invention can operate within a number of different systems including, but not limited to, general-purpose computer systems, embedded computer systems, laptop computer systems, hand-held computer systems, portable computer systems, stand-alone computer systems, or game consoles.
    
*   In one embodiment, depicted by dashed lines **230**, computer system platform **200** may comprise at least one processor **210** and at least one memory **220**. Processor **210** may comprise a central processing unit (CPU) or other type of processor. Depending on the configuration and/or type of computer system environment, memory **220** may comprise volatile memory (e.g., RAM), non-volatile memory (e.g., ROM, flash memory, etc.), or some combination of the two. Additionally, memory **220** may be removable, non-removable, etc.
    
*   In other embodiments, computer system platform **200** may comprise additional storage (e.g., removable storage **240**, non-removable storage **245**, etc.). Removable storage **240** and/or non-removable storage **245** may comprise volatile memory, non-volatile memory, or any combination thereof. Additionally, removable storage **240** and/or non-removable storage **245** may comprise CD-ROM, digital versatile disks (DVD) or other optical storage, magnetic cassettes, magnetic tape, magnetic disk storage or other magnetic storage devices, or any other medium which can be used to store information for access by computer system platform **200**.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 2, computer system platform **200** may communicate with other systems, components, or devices via communication interface **270**. Communication interface **270** may embody computer readable instructions, data structures, program modules or other data in a modulated data signal (e.g., a carrier wave) or other transport mechanism. By way of example, and not limitation, communication interface **270** may couple to wired media (e.g., a wired network, direct-wired connection, etc.) and/or wireless media (e.g., a wireless network, a wireless connection utilizing acoustic, RF, infrared, or other wireless signaling, etc.).
    
*   Communication interface **270** may also couple computer system platform **200** to one or more input devices (e.g., a keyboard, mouse, pen, voice input device, touch input device, etc.) and/or output devices (e.g., a display, speaker, printer, etc.).
    
*   As shown in FIG. 2, graphics processor **250** may perform graphics processing operations on graphical data stored in frame buffer **260** or another memory (e.g., **220**, **240**, **245**, etc.) of computer system platform **200**. Graphical data stored in frame buffer **260** may be accessed, processed, and/or modified by components (e.g., graphics processor **250**, processor **210**, etc.) of computer system platform **200** and/or components of other systems/devices. Additionally, the graphical data may be accessed (e.g., by graphics processor **250**) and displayed on an output device coupled to computer system platform **200**.
    
*   In one embodiment, computer system platform **200** may be used to implement computer system **110** _a_, computer system **110** _b_, computer system **110** _c_, interface component **120**, or some combination thereof. For example, communication interface **270** may communicatively couple computer system **200** to one or more other computer systems (e.g., **110** _a_, **110** _b_, **110** _c_, etc. via interface **120**). Additionally, memory **220**, removable storage **240**, non-removable storage **245**, frame buffer **260**, or a combination thereof, may comprise instructions that when executed on a processor (e.g., **210**, **250**, etc.) perform a method of implementing an interactive educational tool (e.g., using GUI **130**, GUI **150**, etc.), implementing a remote observation and evaluation interface (e.g., using GUI **130**, GUI **150**, etc.), implementing electronic flashcards (e.g., using GUI **130**, GUI **150**, etc.), or some combination thereof. The graphical data used to display the GUI (e.g., **130**, **150**, etc.) may be accessed from frame buffer **260** and displayed on an output device coupled to computer system platform **200**.
    
Interactive Educational Tool*   FIG. 3 shows exemplary on-screen GUI **300** for implementing an exemplary interactive educational tool in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 3, GUI **300** comprises window or region **310** for displaying text or other information about a predetermined subject matter. The text or other information displayed in region **310** may be related to a lesson plan or region of a lesson plan identified in region **320**. Window or region **330** may present media (e.g., video, still images, etc.) related to the predetermined subject matter and/or the information presented in region **310**. The media presented in region **330** may also be related to audio (e.g., an audio track for a video displayed in region **330**, etc.) and/or other visual information (e.g., presented using GUI **300**, presented by other light emitting devices, presented by other displays, etc.).
    
*   Accordingly, GUI **300** may be used to simultaneously present various forms of information (e.g., text in region **310** and video in region **330**, etc.) related to a predetermined subject matter, thereby providing an educational tool which more conveniently and effectively presents educational information to users. For example, where GUI **300** is used to present information about or otherwise teach plumbing, region **320** may identify a unit associated with unclogging a drain, region **310** may present information about clogged drains (e.g., the cause of most clogs, the steps to be taken to unclog the drain, etc.), and region **330** may show a video of a plumber unclogging a drain. As such, learning may be enhanced using GUI **300** given the repetition of information in various forms (e.g., text in region **310** which may explain the steps of unclogging a drain, the video in region **330** which may show the performance of the steps explained in region **310**, etc.), the simultaneous display of this information (e.g., enabling students to quickly and conveniently move from one form of information to another), and the ability for users to interact with this information using GUI **300** as discussed below.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 3, a user may interact (e.g., by moving an on-screen cursor over a region of GUI **300** and clicking a mouse button, by moving an on-screen cursor over a region of GUI **300**, by pressing a touchscreen disposed over GUI **300**, etc.) with various regions of GUI **300**. For example, region **310** may comprise interactive regions **312**\-**316** for enabling users to interact with text and/or other information presented in region **310**. In one embodiment, regions **312**\-**316** may comprise hyperlinked text for initiating display (e.g., within regions of GUI **300**, in another displayed window, etc.) of additional content (e.g., related to the predetermined subject matter). Region **330** may comprise interactive regions **332** and **334** for enabling a user to interact with media presented in region **330**.
    
*   Additionally, GUI **300** may comprise graphical objects **340** for enabling users to control and/or interact with media presented in region **330**. For example, a user may play, stop, alter playback (e.g., fast forward, rewind, zoom, etc.), etc. media presented in region **330** by interacting with graphical objects **340**. Additionally, a user may control the volume level (e.g., of the sound accompanying the media displayed in region **330**) using one or more of graphical objects **340**.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **352** may initiate presentation of facts, rules, or similar information associated with the predetermined subject matter. For example, FIG. 4 shows display of exemplary information **410** in response to interaction with GUI **300** (e.g., graphical object **352**) in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. Information **410** may comprise an excerpt, paraphrase, summary, etc. of information presented in region **310** and/or region **330** of GUI **300**. As such, embodiments enable presentation of information about the predetermined subject matter to users in yet another form, thereby improving learning and retention of the information. Additionally, presentation of information **410** enables users to repeat and/or study the information (e.g., comprising important points that the user may have previously overlooked) to further improve learning of the information.
    
*   FIG. 5 shows exemplary user prompt **510** for encouraging interaction with GUI **300** and viewing of information **410** in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. Graphical object **520** may be used to close or hide user prompt **510**. In one embodiment, a user may be required to interact with graphical object **352** and view information **410** before the user will be allowed to progress in the lesson and learn new/different subject matter (e.g., presented in region **310**, **330**, etc.). As such, embodiments reduce the likelihood that a user will overlook or miss an important point (e.g., presented using information **410**). Additionally, user prompt **510** may be displayed periodically as a user progresses through a lesson (e.g., each time an important point is presented using GUI **300**), thereby increasing interaction with GUI **300** and improving learning of the predetermined subject matter presented using GUI **300**.
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **372** may initiate display of handouts, worksheets, or the like, associated with the predetermined subject matter. In one embodiment where a still image (e.g., a chart, table, etc.) is displayed in region **330**, graphical object **372** may initiate the display of the still image in a larger form (e.g., in a separate window, etc.) for easier viewing and/or enable printing of the image. Alternatively, graphical object **372** may initiate display of a list of worksheets for a unit, task, lesson, etc., thereby enabling a user to select, view, print, etc. materials associated with the predetermined subject matter.
    
*   Interaction with graphical object **374** may initiate display of answer sheets associated with the predetermined subject matter. For example, where questions are presented in region **310** and/or region **330**, graphical object **374** may initiate display of answers to those questions. In this manner, a user may periodically test and/or check his or her knowledge of the presented subject matter to further reinforce and reiterate the material. As such, embodiments provide further mechanisms for improving learning of the predetermined subject matter (e.g., presented using GUI **300** and/or other related GUIs).
    
*   As shown in FIG. 3, Interaction with graphical object **354** may initiate presentation of a GUI which implements electronic flashcards associated with the predetermined subject matter (e.g., as discussed with respect to FIGS. 21A-22). The electronic flashcards may enable the user to further learn and/or study information about the predetermined subject matter. In one embodiment, the electronic flashcards may comprise information **410**, thereby enabling users to learn the information (e.g., presented in regions **310** and/or **330** of GUI **300**) in yet another form.
    
*   FIG. 6 shows exemplary user prompt **610** for encouraging interaction with GUI **300** and viewing of electronic flashcards in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. Graphical object **620** may be used to close or hide user prompt **610**. In one embodiment, a user may be required to interact with graphical object **354** and view electronic flashcards before the user will be allowed to progress in the lesson and learn new/different subject matter (e.g., presented in region **310**, **330**, etc.). As such, embodiments reduce the likelihood that a user will overlook or miss an important point (e.g., presented using a GUI for implementing the electronic flashcards). Additionally, user prompt **610** may be displayed periodically as a user progresses through a lesson (e.g., each time an important point is presented using GUI **300**), thereby increasing interaction with GUI **300** and improving learning of the predetermined subject matter presented using GUI **300**.
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **356** may initiate presentation of a GUI which implements a glossary of terms associated with the predetermined subject matter. For example, FIG. 7 shows exemplary GUI **700** comprising a list of terms (e.g., in column **710**) with respective definitions (e.g., in column **720**) in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. At least one respective keyword for each term is listed in column **730**, while at least one respective task (e.g., unit number, lesson number, etc.) is listed in column **740**. Information within GUI **700** may be sorted based upon column characteristic (e.g., in ascending order, descending order, etc.) by interacting with column headers in row **760** of GUI **700**. Additionally, in one embodiment, the information within at least one of columns **710**\-**740** may comprise the same or similar information as information **410** of FIG. 4, thereby improving learning by enabling users to quickly peruse the listing of important terms within GUI **700**.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 7, a term and/or its corresponding information (e.g., definition, keywords, task, etc.) may be selected and viewed by interacting with the graphical object in column **750** corresponding to the row comprising the selected term and/or corresponding information. In one embodiment, the term and/or its corresponding information may be displayed in a separate window from GUI **700**. Alternatively, the term and/or its corresponding information may be displayed within GUI **700** (e.g., by hiding all rows except for the row with the selected term, by graying out information in rows with non-selected terms, etc.).
    
*   Additionally, information within GUI **700** may be searched by interacting with graphical object **770**. In one embodiment, graphical object **770** may bring up a separate GUI or window enabling a user to specify a search criteria for the search. The search criteria may comprise one or more terms within one or more of columns **710**\-**740**. Additionally, the GUI for specifying the search criteria may comprise one or more graphical objects for initiating the search and causing the search results to be displayed (e.g., within GUI **700**). Where a search (e.g., initiated using graphical object **770**) limits the displayed information within GUI **700** (e.g., to only the rows of information in GUI **700** meeting the search criteria), graphical object **780** may reset the display of information within GUI **700** to an initial state (e.g., originally displayed in response to interaction with graphical object **356** of FIG. 3), to a state preceding the search (e.g., initiated using graphical object **770**), etc. Further, information within GUI **700** may be printed by interacting with graphical object **790**.
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **358** may initiate presentation of a GUI which implements a note-taking tool. For example, FIG. 8A shows exemplary GUI **800**A for enabling users to enter and save notes in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. In one embodiment, terms may be entered in user-modifiable field **810**, definitions may be entered in user-modifiable field **812**, keywords may be entered in user-modifiable field **814**, a unit number may be entered in user-modifiable field **816**, and a task may be entered in user-modifiable field **818**. The entries in fields **810**\-**818** and/or changes to the entries in fields **810**\-**818** may be saved using graphical object **820**. Additionally, GUI **800**A comprises graphical object **830** for deleting a recalled note.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 8A, interaction with graphical object **842** may create a new note. In one embodiment, fields **810**\-**818** may be cleared to enable a user to enter new information. Once graphical object **842** has been activated, subsequent interaction with graphical object **820** may save changes to the new note. Similarly, once graphical object **842** has been activated, subsequent interaction with graphical object **830** may delete the new note. Further, information within GUI **800**A may be printed by interacting with graphical object **848**.
    
*   Interaction with graphical object **846** may display a list of saved notes within GUI **800**B of FIG. 8B. FIG. 8B shows several exemplary notes in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention, where each note comprises a term (e.g., within column **860**), a respective definition (e.g., within column **862**), at least one respective keyword (e.g., within column **864**), a respective unit (e.g., within column **866**), a respective task (e.g., within column **868**), or some combination thereof. Information within GUI **800**B may be sorted based upon column characteristic (e.g., in ascending order, descending order, etc.) by interacting with column headers in row **880** of GUI **800**B.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 8B, a saved note may be selected and viewed by interacting with the graphical object in column **870** corresponding to the row comprising the selected note. In one embodiment, a term and/or it corresponding information (e.g., definition, keywords, unit, task, etc.) of the selected note may be displayed in a separate window from GUI **700**. Alternatively, a term and/or its corresponding information of the selected note may be displayed within GUI **700** (e.g., by hiding all rows except for the row with the selected note, by graying out information in rows with non-selected notes, etc.).
    
*   Additionally, information within GUI **800**B may be searched by interacting with graphical object **844**. In one embodiment, graphical object **844** may bring up a separate GUI or window enabling a user to specify a search criteria for the search. The search criteria may comprise one or more terms within one or more of columns **860**\-**868**. Additionally, the GUI for specifying the search criteria may comprise one or more graphical objects for initiating the search and causing the search results to be displayed (e.g., within GUI **800**B). Where a search (e.g., initiated using graphical object **844**) limits the displayed information within GUI **800**B (e.g., to only the rows of information in GUI **800**B meeting the search criteria), graphical object **846** may reset the display of information within GUI **800**B to the state preceding the search (e.g., initiated using graphical object **844**). Further, information within GUI **800**B may be printed by interacting with graphical object **848**.
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 8A, interaction with graphical objects **850** may navigate or cycle through saved notes (e.g., all saved notes, a subset of saved notes determined by a search, etc.). Graphical object **852** may indicate a current note for which information is displayed (e.g., in GUI **800**A). Additionally, graphical object **854** may indicate a number of saved notes through which graphical objects **850** may be used to navigate.
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **362** may initiate presentation of a GUI for entering answers to questions and comparing the entered answer with the correct answer. For example, FIG. 9A shows exemplary GUI **900** for entering answers to questions in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 9A, a question may be selected by interacting with graphical objects **910**. The selected question may be displayed in region **920**. Additionally, user-modifiable field **930** may accept a user-input response to the question.
    
*   FIG. 9B show exemplary GUI **900** for comparing a user-input response with a predetermined answer in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 9B, interaction with graphical object **940** may initiate display of a predetermined answer (e.g., in region **950** of GUI **900**) to the question (e.g., selected using graphical objects **910** and displayed in region **920**), where the predetermined answer may remain hidden until graphical object **940** is activated. The predetermined answer may remain visible in region **950** for a predetermined period of time until it automatically returns to the hidden state. Alternatively, the predetermined answer may remain visible until a user input (e.g., via graphical object **940**, another graphical object of GUI **900**, etc.) is detected requesting that the predetermined answer be hidden. Accordingly, the user-input response entered in field **930** may be compared with the predetermined answer, thereby improving learning by encouraging the user to review the predetermined subject matter, find the correct answer, think about why the user-input response may not match the predetermined answer, etc.
    
*   Interaction with graphical object **960** may save the user-input response in field **930**. In one embodiment, graphical object **960** may indicate a final answer to the question presented in region **920**. Additionally, interaction with graphical object **970** may initiate display of a GUI which displays saved answers.
    
*   FIG. 10 shows exemplary GUI **1000** for displaying saved answers in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. The answers displayed in GUI **1000** may be those entered into field **930** of GUI **900** and saved by interacting with graphical object **970** of GUI **900**. As shown in FIG. 10, column **1010** may comprise a task number related to the answer, column **1020** may comprise the question (e.g., displayed in region **920** of GUI **900**), column **1030** may comprise a user-input response (e.g., entered into field **930** of GUI **900**) to the question, and column **1040** may comprise a predetermined answer (e.g., displayed in region **950** of GUI **900** as shown in FIG. 9B) to the question. As such, users can easily and quickly review their responses and compare them to the correct or predetermined answers. Further, interaction with graphical object **1050** may initiate printing of the information in GUI **1000** (e.g., to enable users to study and review a hardcopy of the information).
    
*   In one embodiment, user-input responses (e.g., shown in column **1030** of GUI **1000**) may be accessed by another person and/or computer system for analyzing the student's performance, determining if a student is taking the lesson seriously, latency of the responses from a user, error analysis, or the like. For example, where GUI **130** of computer system **110** _a_ is used to implement GUI **900** and/or GUI **1000**, the information may be stored locally on computer system **100** _a_ for subsequent analysis (e.g., automatically by a program run on computer system **110** _a_, by a professor or other person using computer system **110** _a_ after the user, etc.), exported to another computer system for remote analysis (e.g., automatically by a program run on computer system **110** _b_ and/or **110** _c_, by a professor or other person using computer system **110** _b_ and/or **110** _c_, etc.).
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **382** may advance the lesson (e.g., advance to a new task, new unit, etc.) and present new information (e.g., using GUI **300**, another GUI, etc.) related to the predetermined subject matter. Graphical object **384** may return to previously-accessed subject matter. Additionally, interaction with graphical object **386** may initiate display of a GUI for selecting a unit or task (e.g., to present using GUI **300**).
    
*   FIG. 11 shows exemplary GUI **1100** for selecting a unit or task in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 11, column **1110** lists units, column **1120** lists the last task accessed (e.g., using GUI **300** of FIG. 3), and column **1130** provides an exemplary description of each unit. In one embodiment, some or all of the information in columns **1110**\-**1130** may be interactive such that users may initiate display of information (e.g., using GUI **300** of FIG. 3) related to the information interacted with. For example, if a user interacts with “Unit **4**” in column **1110**, then GUI **300** may be displayed to present information about the fourth unit. As another example, if a user interacts with “**4**.**01** _a_ **1**” in column **1120**, then GUI **300** may be displayed to present information about task **4**.**01** _a_ **1**.
    
*   GUI **1100** may also comprise graphical object **1140** for initiating display of a GUI for entering or changing account information (e.g., username, password, personal details, etc.). Interaction with graphical object **1150** may initiate display of a GUI for enabling observation and/or evaluation of a student by a professor (e.g., as discussed below with respect to FIGS. 15-20).
    
*   Turning back to FIG. 3, interaction with graphical object **388** may initiate display of a GUI for tracking student progress. FIG. 12 shows exemplary GUI **1200** for tracking student progress in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 12, interaction with graphical objects **1210** may initiate display (e.g., within a region of GUI **1200**, within a separate window or GUI, etc.) of information (e.g., amount of the unit or lesson completed, completion date if completed, etc.) about the student's progress through the lesson. For example, if a user positions an on-screen cursor over the number “5” of graphical objects **1210**, then information about the student's progress through unit **5** (e.g., a completion date for unit **5**) may be displayed.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 12, region **1220** of GUI **1200** may comprise unit numbers and descriptions of each unit. In one embodiment, the descriptions of the units in region **1220** may match the descriptions in column **1130** of FIG. 11. In other embodiments, the information in region **1220** may comprise a summary or title for each unit.
    
*   Region **1230** comprises headings and subheadings for grouping the listing of units (e.g., represented by graphical objects **1210** and the numbers within region **1220**). For example, heading **1240** has four subheadings **1250**\-**1280**. Subheading **1250** comprises unit **13**, unit **1**, and unit **4**. As such, GUI **1200** provides a listing of units as well as grouping and/or characterization of the units (e.g., represented by headings and/or subheadings within column **1230**) to provide additional information (e.g., contextual information for a selected unit with respect to other units) about the predetermined subject matter.
    
*   FIG. 13 shows exemplary computer-implemented process **1300** for implementing an interactive education tool in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 13, step **1310** involves accessing data (e.g., **140** of FIG. 1) from a first computer system (e.g., **110** _b_ of FIG. 1). The first computer system (e.g., **110** _b_) may be communicatively coupled to an interface (e.g., **120** of FIG. 1), and the data (e.g., **140**) may be accessed using that interface (e.g., **120**).
    
*   Step **1320** involves displaying text comprising educational information associated with a predetermined subject matter. The text may be generated from the data (e.g., **140**) accessed in step **1310**. Additionally, the text may be displayed (e.g., using GUI **130** of FIG. 1, in region **310** of GUI **300** of FIG. 3, etc.) on a second computer system (e.g., **110** _a_ of FIG. 1) located remotely from the first computer system.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 13, step **1330** involves presenting media related to the text (e.g., displayed in step **1320**) and comprising educational information associated with the predetermined subject matter. The media may be generated from the data (e.g., **140**) accessed in step **1310**. Additionally, the media may be presented (e.g., using GUI **130** of FIG. 1, in region **330** of GUI **300** of FIG. 3, etc.) on a second computer system (e.g., **110** _a_ of FIG. 1) located remotely from the first computer system. Further, the media may be presented simultaneously with the display of the text in step **1320** in one embodiment.
    
*   The media may comprise video, still images, sound, etc. Additionally, the media may visually depict the predetermined subject matter associated with the text. For example, where the predetermined subject matter is plumbing related to drain unclogging, the text (e.g., displayed in step **1320**) may explain how to unclog a drain and the media (e.g., presented in step **1330**) may show a plumber unclogging a drain.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 13, step **1340** involves presenting other information associated with the predetermined subject matter. For example, the additional information presented in step **1340** may comprise a listing of answers to questions associated with the predetermined subject matter, user-input responses to questions associated with the predetermined subject matter, user-input notes associated with the predetermined subject matter, a glossary of terms used in the text, and educational worksheets associated with the predetermined subject matter.
    
*   FIG. 14 shows exemplary computer-implemented process **1400** for presenting questions and accepting user-input responses to the question in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 14, step **1410** involves displaying a question associated with a predetermined subject matter. The question may be displayed (e.g., using GUI **130**, in region **920** of GUI **900**, etc.) using data (e.g., **140**) accessed from a remote computer system (e.g., **110** _b_).
    
*   Step **1420** involves accessing a user-input response (e.g., answer) to the question. The user-input response may be input to and/or displayed in a user-modifiable field (e.g., **930**) of a GUI (e.g., **900**).
    
*   As shown in FIG. 14, step **1430** involves displaying an answer to the question for comparison with the user-input response. The answer may be displayed (e.g., in region **950** of GUI **900**) in response to a user input (e.g., an interaction with graphical object **940** of GUI **900**). Additionally, the answer may remain hidden until it is displayed in step **1430**. The answer may remain visible for a predetermined period of time after display in step **1430** until it automatically returns to the hidden state. Alternatively, the answer may remain visible until a user input (e.g., via graphical object **940**, another graphical object of GUI **900**, etc.) is detected requesting that the predetermined answer be hidden. Accordingly, the user-input response (e.g., accessed in step **1420**) may be compared with the predetermined answer (e.g., displayed in step **1430**), thereby improving learning by encouraging the user to review the predetermined subject matter, find the correct answer, think about why the user-input response may not match the predetermined answer, etc.
    
*   Step **1440** involves determining whether a request was detected for the user-input response (e.g., accessed in step **1420**) to be saved (e.g., by interacting with graphical object **960**). If it is determined that a request was not detected for the user-input response to be saved, then steps **1420**\-**1440** may be repeated. Alternatively, if it is determined that a request was detected for the user-input response to be saved, then the user-input response may be accessed and stored (e.g., in a memory of the computer system presenting the GUI for displaying the question, in a memory of a remote computer system, etc.) in step **1450**.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 14, step **1460** involves accessing the stored user-input response for review and/or analysis. The stored user-input response may be displayed (e.g., in GUI **1000** for review by a user, on a remote system for review by a professor or an individual performing student analysis, etc.). The stored user-input response may be accessed (e.g., by a local computer system, by a remote computer system, etc.) for automated analysis of the student's performance in another embodiment.
    
Remote Observation and Evaluation Interface*   FIG. 15 shows exemplary GUI **1500** for listing coaches or professors in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 15, region **1510** of GUI **1500** comprises a listing of coaches or professors, information (e.g., area of expertise, years in a given industry, etc.) about one or more of the coaches or professors, and times when the coach or professor is available to observe and/or evaluate a student. For example, “Coach 1” specializes in plumbing, has been a plumber for over 15 years, and is available on Tuesdays and Thursdays for observation and/or evaluation sessions with students. Additionally, GUI **1500** comprises graphical objects **1520** for requesting sessions with a coach or professor (e.g., listed in region **1510**). In one embodiment, interaction with one of graphical objects **1520** may initiate display of a GUI for enabling a student to request a session with a coach or professor (e.g., corresponding to the activated one of graphical objects **1520**). Additionally, interaction with graphical object **1530** may initiate display of a forum GUI for enabling users (e.g., students, coaches or professors, etc.) to share information, exchange content (e.g., videos, pictures, etc.), etc.
    
*   FIG. 16 shows exemplary GUI **1600** for enabling a student to request a session with a coach or professor in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 16, region **1610** of GUI **1600** comprises information about the availability of coach or professor to aid the student in requesting a session. For example, “Coach 1” is available from 11 am to 3 pm on Tuesday, and from 2 pm to 5 pm on Thursday. Region **1620** comprises a plurality of user-modifiable fields for requesting a day and/or time for a session with a coach or professor. Further, students can enter or suggest multiple days/times for the session in order of preference. Additionally, region **1630** comprises a user-modifiable field for entering a message (e.g., to accompany the session request to the coach or professor). Further, interaction with graphical object **1640** may send the requested time and/or message to the coach or professor.
    
*   FIG. 17 shows exemplary GUI **1700** for enabling a coach or professor to view students and setup a session with a student in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 17, GUI **1700** comprises a list of students (e.g., in column **1710**), a respective highest unit number to which each student has access (e.g., in column **1720**), and respective minutes of credit remaining (e.g., in column **1730**) for use toward observation and/or evaluation sessions with a coach or professor. Additionally, column **1740** comprises a plurality of respective graphical objects corresponding to each student and for enabling a coach or professor to initiate a session with a student. For example, interaction with a graphical object in column **1740** may initiate display of a GUI for enabling the coach or professor to observe and/or evaluate the student.
    
*   FIG. 18A shows exemplary GUI **1800** for initiating an observation and/or evaluation session with a student in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention, whereas FIG. 18B shows exemplary GUI **1800** for terminating an observation and/or evaluation session with a student in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 18A, GUI **1800** comprises region **1810** for presenting media (e.g., video, still images, etc.). In one embodiment, video of a student performing an action or task related to a predetermined subject matter (e.g., taught using an interactive educational tool implemented using GUI **300**) may be displayed in region **1810**. Audio related to the video presented in region **1810** may be played simultaneously with the video to implement an audio/visual presentation. The media presented using regions of GUI **1800** (e.g., region **1810**) may be pre-recorded, streamed, live, etc. Accordingly, a coach or professor may observe and/or evaluate the student's performance using GUI **1800**.
    
*   Video displayed in region **1810** may be generated using a video and/or audio conferencing software such as Skype™, IChat from Apple Inc. of Cupertino, Calif., or the like. As such, a student may use a camera (e.g., web camera, etc.) coupled to a computer system (e.g., **110** _c_ of FIG. 1) to record or otherwise capture an action or performance. The video data of the performance may be accessed by a computer system (e.g., **110** _a_) of a coach or professor and used to present the student's performance to the coach or professor (e.g., in region **1810** of GUI **1800**). Thus, a coach or professor may observe and/or evaluate the student's performance using video (e.g., presented using GUI **1800**) and/or audio (e.g., associated with the video presented in region **1810** of GUI **1800**, presented simultaneously with the display of GUI **1800**, etc.).
    
*   GUI **1800** may also provide the ability to record the duration of an observation and/or evaluation session. For example, a coach or professor may interact with graphical object **1820** (e.g., shown in FIG. 18A) to start a timer (e.g., displayed in region **1840** of GUI **1800** showing an elapsed time of the session). The timer may be stopped by interacting with graphical object **1830** (e.g., shown in FIG. 18B). In one embodiment, the timer may be started when the student begins a performance, and may be stopped when the student completes the performance. Additionally, it should be appreciated that graphical object **1820** and graphical object **1830** may be simultaneously displayed in GUI **1800** in other embodiments.
    
*   Additionally, GUI **1800** may implement an automated billing system for the sessions conducted by the coach or professor. For example, a user or student may purchase a predetermined amount of time of observation/evaluation by a coach or professor. Region **1850** may indicate an amount of purchased time (e.g., displayed in column **1730** of FIG. 17) for use toward observation and/or evaluation by a coach. In one embodiment, region **1850** may display an amount of purchased time remaining before the current session was initiated (e.g., using graphical object **1820**). Region **1860** may indicate the remaining time for use toward observation and/or evaluation by a coach, where the amount of time displayed in region **1860** may decrement as the elapsed time displayed in region **1840** increments. As such, GUI **1800** may enable the student to be automatically charged or billed (e.g., in response to interaction with graphical object **1870**) for observation/evaluation time used (e.g., displayed in region **1840**). Alternatively, interaction with graphical object **1880** may enable the session to be reset (e.g., to reset the timer displayed in region **1840** and the remaining minutes displayed in region **1860**).
    
*   It should be appreciated that audio alone (e.g., associated with the video presented in region **1810** of GUI **1800**, presented simultaneously with the display of GUI **1800**, etc.) may be used to observe and/or evaluate a student in one embodiment. For example, a coach or professor may listen to a vocal performance (e.g., by accessing a pre-recorded performance of the student, using an audio conferencing software, etc.) of a student and evaluate the student's performance based upon the presented audio. Further, regions of GUI **1800** may enable timing (e.g., using graphical objects **1820** and **1830** to time the session whose duration is displayed in region **1840**) and/or automated billing of the audio performance (e.g., based upon the elapsed time displayed in region **1840**, based upon the remaining amount of purchased time displayed in region **1860**, etc.).
    
*   FIG. 19 shows exemplary computer-implemented process **1900** for initiating a GUI for enabling observation and evaluation of a user in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 19, step **1910** involves capturing content of a student's performance. Capturing may comprise storing the content (e.g., video, still images, audio, video and audio, etc.), generating a live feed of the content, digitizing the content, transforming the content (e.g., transforming light and/or sound into a signal or data used to reproduce the light and/or sound, etc.), etc. The performance may be related to a predetermined subject matter (e.g., taught using an interactive educational tool implemented using GUI **300**). Video content and/or still image content may be captured by a camera (e.g., a web camera, other still-image camera, other video camera, etc.) and accessed by a computer system (e.g., **110** _a_) of the student. Audio content may be captured by a microphone or the like and accessed by a computer system (e.g., **110** _a_) of the student.
    
*   Step **1920** involves accessing the captured content. The captured content (e.g., captured in step **1910**) may be accessed by a computer system (e.g., **110** _b_) of a coach or professor. In another embodiment, the captured content may be accessed by an interface component (e.g., **120**) coupled to the student's computer system (e.g., **110** _a_) and/or a computer system of a coach or professor (e.g., **110** _b_).
    
*   As shown in FIG. 19, step **1930** involves presenting the accessed content using a GUI for enabling observation and/or evaluation of the student's performance. The GUI (e.g., **1800**) may enable a coach or professor to observe and/or evaluate a student's performance (e.g., by displaying video or pictures of the performance captured in step **1910**, playing audio of the performance captured in step **1910**, etc.) related to the predetermined subject matter. In one embodiment, the content may be presented in real-time, thereby enabling the observation and/or evaluation in real-time. Additionally, the content may be communicated via a communication channel (e.g., implemented using interface **120** and/or other networking components) formed between the computer system presenting GUI **1800** (e.g., computer system **110** _a_) and the coach's or professor's computer system (e.g., **110** _c_).
    
*   Step **1940** involves automatically billing the student for the observation and/or evaluation session. In one embodiment, automated billing may be implemented by deducting a determined length of the session from units of time purchased by the student. The duration of the session may be determined using a timer (e.g., presented to a coach or professor using GUI **1800**) which may be started and stopped based upon user inputs (e.g., by a coach or professor interacting with graphical objects **1820** and **1830** of GUI **1800**). Alternatively, the duration of the session may be automatically determined (e.g., based upon the duration of the video and/or audio captured).
    
Electronic Flashcards*   FIG. 20A shows exemplary GUI **2000** for implementing electronic flashcards in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As used herein, the term “electronic flashcard” can mean a visual representation of one or both sides of a flashcard, where the visual representation may be displayed on a display device coupled to a computer system (e.g., **110** _a_, **110** _b_, **110** _c_, **200**, etc.). One side of the electronic flashcard may remain hidden until it is selectively revealed or displayed (e.g., in response to a user input or interaction with GUI **2000**), where the selective revealing or displaying may comprise a “flipping” of the electronic flashcard in one embodiment. Additionally, the term “hidden” as used herein can mean not displayed, displayed so that it is less visible, etc.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 20A, GUI **2000** comprises region **2010** for displaying one or both sides of an electronic flashcard (e.g., an “active” electronic flashcard). Additionally, region **2020** comprises multiple piles or stacks (e.g., **2022**\-**2026**) for storing electronic flashcards which are not currently being viewed (e.g., “inactive” electronic flashcards). In one embodiment, the electronic flashcards implemented using GUI **2000** may comprise SAFMEDS cards.
    
*   Electronic flashcards may be transferred between regions **2010** and **2020** by interacting with one or more regions of GUI **2000**. For example, graphical object **2030** may be used to automatically transfer an active electronic flashcard from region **2010** to region **2020** in one embodiment. Alternatively, interaction with one or both sides of the active flashcard displayed in region **2010** (e.g., by (e.g., by moving an on-screen cursor over one or both sides and clicking a mouse button, by moving an on-screen cursor over one or both sides and double-clicking a mouse button, etc.) may transfer an active electronic flashcard from region **2010** to region **2020**. Additionally, interaction with an inactive electronic flashcard in one of the piles of region **2020** and/or interaction with a graphical object (e.g., of GUI **2000**) may automatically transfer one or more selected electronic flashcards from region **2020** to region **2010**.
    
*   In one embodiment, limitations may be placed on the transferring of electronic flashcards between regions **2010** and **2020**. For example, a user may be required to view or otherwise interact with an electronic flashcard in region **2010** (e.g., one time, multiple times, etc.) before transferring it to portion **2020**. As such, embodiments may improve learning of the material presented using GUI **2000** by increasing user interaction with the material presented using the electronic flashcards of GUI **2000**.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 20A, region **2010** comprises region **2040** (e.g., a first side of an active electronic flashcard) for displaying first set of information **2045**. Information **2045** displayed in region **2040** may remain visible while a second set of information to be displayed in region **2050** (e.g., a second side of the active electronic flashcard) is hidden. Interaction with graphical object **2060** may “flip” the flashcard and display the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) as depicted in FIG. 20B. Information **2045** and information **2055** may both be associated with a predetermined subject matter (e.g., taught using an interactive educational tool implemented using GUI **300**). As such, in one embodiment, a user may learn the first and/or second sets of information by viewing the information displayed in region **2040** (e.g., information **2045**), attempting to recite the information hidden in region **2050** (e.g., information **2055**), interacting with graphical object **2060** to display information **2055** in region **2050**, and then checking the recited information against information **2055**.
    
*   Information **2045** and/or information **2055** may comprise text (e.g., a word, phrase, term, definition of the term, etc.), colors, patterns, etc. Additionally, information **2045** and information **2055** may be related (e.g., to one another and a predetermined subject matter) such that a user may view one set of information and test his or her knowledge of the other (e.g., by trying to recite the hidden information). For example, information **2045** displayed in region **2040** may comprise a term (e.g., the words “pipe wrench”), while information **2055** to be selectively displayed in region **2050** may comprise a definition of the term displayed in region **2040**, where information **2045** and information **2055** are related to a predetermined subject matter (e.g., plumbing). As such, a user may attempt to recite information **2055** (e.g., a definition of “pipe wrench”) after looking at information **2045** (e.g., the term “pipe wrench”) but before the display of information **2055** in region **2050**, thereby using the electronic flashcards implemented using GUI **2000** to learn about the predetermined subject matter (e.g., plumbing).
    
*   Thus, embodiments improve learning (e.g., of a predetermined subject matter) by increasing the amount of information or content which may be displayed on the electronic flashcards compared with conventional, handwritten flashcards. For example, electronic information or content to be displayed on the electronic flashcards may be relatively small (e.g., occupy a relatively small amount of storage space) and/or be accessed from one or more sources (e.g., local hard drives, remote computer systems, etc.). Additionally, the electronic flashcards are less likely to be damaged, lost, or stolen given that they are in electronic form. Further, the information on each side of the electronic flashcards may be automatically generated (e.g., based upon a lesson plan of another module, based upon a user-defined subject matter, etc.) in one embodiment, thereby reducing the time and effort to create the flashcards.
    
*   In another embodiment, information **2045** may comprise a picture (e.g., of a pipe wrench) or video (e.g., of a plumber using a pipe wrench). As such, a user may attempt to recite information **2055** (e.g., a definition of a “pipe wrench,” the term “pipe wrench,” etc.) after looking at information **2045** (e.g., a picture or video showing a pipe wrench) but before the display of information **2055** in region **2050**, thereby using the electronic flashcards implemented using GUI **2000** to learn about the predetermined subject matter (e.g., plumbing).
    
*   Thus, embodiments may further improve learning (e.g., of a predetermined subject matter) by further increasing the amount of information or content which may be displayed on the electronic flashcards compared with conventional, handwritten flashcards. For example, video and/or audio content may be presented to a user, thereby improving learning by presenting information in different forms to stimulate more senses of a user (e.g., catering to visual learners, audio learners, etc.). Additionally, the presentation of information in different forms can increase repetition of information to improve information absorption/retention.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 20C, interaction with graphical object **2070** may initiate display of second set of information **2055** in region **2040** (e.g., while first set of information **2045** is hidden). Additionally, interaction with graphical object **2070** may associate first set of information **2045** with region **2050** such that a subsequent interaction with graphical object **2060** may initiate display of information **2045** in region **2050** (e.g., as depicted in FIG. 20D). As such, interaction with graphical object **2070** may effectively switch the front and back sides of the electronic flashcard in one embodiment. Thus, embodiments further improve learning by enabling both sets of information (e.g., **2045** and **2055**) to be selectively hidden and revealed (e.g., in region **2050** using graphical object **2060**), thereby enabling users to test their memorization, learning, understanding, etc. of both sets of information (e.g., **2045** and **2055**).
    
*   As shown in FIG. 20A, region **2020** comprises stacks **2022**\-**2026** for storing electronic flashcards which are not currently being viewed (e.g., “inactive” electronic flashcards). Stack **2022** may comprise electronic flashcards which have not yet been accessed or viewed (e.g., transferred to region **2010**). In one embodiment, electronic flashcards may automatically accumulate in stack **2022** as a user progresses through a lesson and encounters or accesses new subject matter (e.g., to be placed on one or more electronic flashcards).
    
*   Stack **2024** and/or stack **2026** may comprise electronic flashcards which have been previously accessed or viewed (e.g., transferred from region **2010** to region **2020**). In one embodiment stacks **2024** and **2026** may comprise electronic flashcards sorted based upon based upon user-confidence level with the subject matter of the electronic flashcards. For example, stack **2024** may comprise electronic flashcards with subject matter which a user is less comfortable with (e.g., has not memorized, etc.), while stack **2026** may comprise electronic flashcards with subject matter which a user is more confident with (e.g., has memorized, etc.). Alternatively, stacks **2024** and **2026** may comprise electronic flashcards sorted by subject matter (e.g., electronic flashcards with different types of plumbing tools in stack **2024**, electronic flashcards with different plumbing techniques in stack **2026**, etc.) and/or grouped based upon other characteristics.
    
*   As such, embodiments enable users to sort, group, or otherwise place electronic flashcards in one or more stacks (e.g., **2024**, **2026**, etc.), thereby improving learning (e.g., of the predetermined subject matter) by enabling users to separate out and focus on the more troublesome material (e.g., displayed or stored in stack **2024**) while devoting less attention to the material which the user is more comfortable with (e.g., displayed or stored in stack **2026**). The number of electronic flashcards in a given stack (e.g., **2022**, **2024**, **2026**, etc.) may also be reduced by placing the electronic flashcards into a larger number of stacks. Thus, the material presented using the electronic flashcards may be more easily learned by enabling users may focus on a smaller amount of material at a given time.
    
*   In one embodiment, the number of cards placed on at least one stack (e.g., **2022**, **2024**, **2026**, etc.) of region **2020** may be limited. For example, once a stack (e.g., **2022**, **2024**, **2026**, etc.) reaches its predetermined limit, one or more electronic flashcards may be removed before allowing additional electronic flashcards to be placed the stack. As a further example, stack **2022** may have a limit of one card and stack **2024** may have a limit of six cards, while stack **2026** may have no limit or a user-defined limit. In this manner, learning may be improved by encouraging and/or forcing a user to learn the previously-accessed material before moving on to additional material.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 20E, stack **2024** may have reached a predetermined limit (e.g., as indicated by a visual attribute, e.g., the darker color or shade of stack **2024**) of six electronic flashcards, thereby requiring removal of an electronic flashcard from stack **2024** (e.g., by moving an electronic flashcard from stack **2024** to stack **2026**, by moving an electronic flashcard from stack **2024** to region **2010** for viewing, etc.) before another electronic flashcard may be located on stack **2024**. Thus, embodiments reduce the review time for each stack and enable users to more effectively, quickly, and easily learn the material (e.g., using the SAFMEDS method of periodically performing short review sessions).
    
*   Additionally, GUI **2000** may enable automated shuffling of the electronic flashcards in one or more stacks (e.g., **2022**, **2024**, **2026**, etc.) of region **2020**. The shuffling may be initiated by interacting with one or more graphical objects of GUI **2000** (not shown in FIG. 20A), by interacting with a region of GUI **2000** (e.g., activating or selecting an electronic flashcard from region **2020**, clicking or double-clicking a stack in region **2020**, etc.), etc. As such, embodiments enable more randomized and improved shuffling over manual shuffling of conventional flashcards, thereby improving learning of the material. Additionally, in one embodiment, the automatic shuffling of GUI **2000** may enable users to use the electronic flashcards in accordance with the SAFMEDS method.
    
*   Further, in one embodiment, GUI **2000** may enable one or more electronic flashcards (e.g., displayed within region **2010** and/or **2020**) to be printed. As such, users may conveniently and quickly generate hard-copy flashcards (e.g., printed on paper, cardstock, index cards, etc.) for reviewing the material of the electronic flashcards in hard-copy form. As such, if any of the cards are damaged, lost, stolen, etc., one or more of the flashcards may be conveniently and quickly re-printed.
    
*   Although FIGS. 20A-20E display only one active electronic flashcard in region **2010**, it should be appreciated that more than one active electronic flashcard may be displayed in region **2010** in other embodiments. Additionally, although region **2020** comprises three stacks (e.g., **2022**, **2024**, and **2026**) in FIGS. 20A-20E, it should be appreciated that region **2020** may comprise a larger or smaller number of stacks in other embodiments.
    
*   FIG. 21 shows exemplary computer-implemented process **2100** for implementing electronic flashcards in accordance with one embodiment of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 21, step **2110** involves displaying a first set of information (e.g., **2045**) associated with a predetermined subject matter in a first area (e.g., **2040**) of a GUI (e.g., **2000** as depicted in FIGS. 20A-20E) while a second set of information (e.g. **2055**) associated with the predetermined subject matter remains hidden. In one embodiment, the first set of information (e.g., **2045**) may comprise text (e.g., a word, phrase, term, etc.), colors, patterns, graphical information (e.g., still images, video, etc.), or the like.
    
*   Step **2120** involves determining whether a request to display the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) in the first area (e.g., **2040**) has been detected. If a request to display the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) in the first area (e.g., **2040**) has not been detected, then step **2130** may be performed.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 21, step **2130** involves detecting a user input requesting display of the second set of information (e.g., **2055**). The user input may comprise an interaction with a graphical object (e.g., **2060** of FIGS. 20A-20E) of the GUI (e.g., **2000**) displaying the first set of information (e.g., **2045**) in step **2110**.
    
*   Step **2140** involves displaying the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) in a second area (e.g., **2050**) of the GUI (e.g., **2000**). In one embodiment, the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) may comprise text (e.g., a word, phrase, definition of a term, etc.), colors, patterns, graphical information (e.g., still images, video, etc.), or the like.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 21, step **2150** involves automatically hiding the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) after a predetermined period of time. Alternatively, the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) may be hidden in response to a user input (e.g., to GUI **2000**).
    
*   If it is determined in step **2120** that a request to display the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) in the first area (e.g., **2040**) has been detected, then the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) may be displayed in the first area (e.g., **2040**) of the GUI (e.g., **2000**) in step **2160**. The second set of information (e.g., **2055**) may be displayed in the first area (e.g., **2040**) while the first set of information (e.g. **2045**) remains hidden.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 21, step **2170** involves detecting a user input requesting display of the first set of information (e.g., **2045**). The user input may comprise an interaction with a graphical object (e.g., **2060**) of the GUI (e.g., **2000**) displaying the second set of information (e.g., **2055**) in step **2160**.
    
*   Step **2180** involves displaying the first set of information (e.g., **2045**) in the second area (e.g., **2050**) of the GUI (e.g., **2000**). In one embodiment, the first set of information (e.g., **2045**) may comprise text (e.g., a word, phrase, definition of a term, etc.), colors, patterns, graphical information (e.g., still images, video, etc.), or the like.
    
*   As shown in FIG. 21, step **2190** involves automatically hiding the first set of information (e.g., **2045**) after a predetermined period of time. Alternatively, the first set of information (e.g., **2045**) may be hidden in response to a user input (e.g., to GUI **2000**).
    
*   In the foregoing specification, embodiments of the invention have been described with reference to numerous specific details that may vary from implementation to implementation. Thus, the sole and exclusive indicator of what is, and is intended by the applicant to be, the invention is the set of claims that issue from this application, in the specific form in which such claims issue, including any subsequent correction. Hence, no limitation, element, property, feature, advantage, or attribute that is not expressly recited in a claim should limit the scope of such claim in any way. Accordingly, the specification and drawings are to be regarded in an illustrative rather than a restrictive sense.
    

  
  
from Hacker News https://ift.tt/35jKFjj