---
title: 'Security Bulletin: A security vulnerability has been identified in Red Hat® Enterprise Linux (RHEL) Server shipped with PurePower Integrated Manager (PPIM)'
date: 2019-12-04T01:17:00+01:00
draft: false
---

CVEID:   CVE-2018-12549 DESCRIPTION:   In Eclipse OpenJ9 version 0.11.0, the OpenJ9 JIT compiler may incorrectly omit a null check on the receiver object of an Unsafe call when accelerating it.CVSS Base score: 9.8CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/2RkzFPt for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:L/PR:N/UI:N/S:U/C:H/I:H/A:H) CVEID:   CVE-2019-2426 DESCRIPTION:   Vulnerability in the Java SE component of Oracle Java SE (subcomponent: Networking). Supported versions that are affected are Java SE: 7u201, 8u192 and 11.0.1; Java SE Embedded: 8u191. Difficult to exploit vulnerability allows unauthenticated attacker with network access via multiple protocols to compromise Java SE. Successful attacks of this vulnerability can result in unauthorized read access to a subset of Java SE accessible data. Note: This vulnerability applies to Java deployments, typically in clients running sandboxed Java Web Start applications or sandboxed Java applets (in Java SE 8), that load and run untrusted code (e.g., code that comes from the internet) and rely on the Java sandbox for security. This vulnerability can also be exploited by using APIs in the specified Component, e.g., through a web service which supplies data to the APIs. CVSS 3.0 Base Score 3.7 (Confidentiality impacts). CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:H/PR:N/UI:N/S:U/C:L/I:N/A:N).CVSS Base score: 3.7CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/2qOJOsx for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:H/PR:N/UI:N/S:U/C:L/I:N/A:N) CVEID:   CVE-2019-2449 DESCRIPTION:   Vulnerability in the Java SE component of Oracle Java SE (subcomponent: Deployment). The supported version that is affected is Java SE: 8u192. Difficult to exploit vulnerability allows unauthenticated attacker with network access via multiple protocols to compromise Java SE. Successful attacks require human interaction from a person other than the attacker. Successful attacks of this vulnerability can result in unauthorized ability to cause a partial denial of service (partial DOS) of Java SE. Note: This vulnerability applies to Java deployments, typically in clients running sandboxed Java Web Start applications or sandboxed Java applets (in Java SE 8), that load and run untrusted code (e.g., code that comes from the internet) and rely on the Java sandbox for security. This vulnerability does not apply to Java deployments, typically in servers, that load and run only trusted code (e.g., code installed by an administrator). CVSS 3.0 Base Score 3.1 (Availability impacts). CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:H/PR:N/UI:R/S:U/C:N/I:N/A:L).CVSS Base score: 3.1CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/356PbST for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:H/PR:N/UI:R/S:U/C:N/I:N/A:L) CVEID:   CVE-2018-1890 DESCRIPTION:   IBM SDK, Java Technology Edition Version 8 on the AIX platform uses absolute RPATHs which may facilitate code injection and privilege elevation by local users. IBM X-Force ID: 152081.CVSS Base score: 5.6CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/2YcwPNU for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:L/AC:H/PR:N/UI:N/S:C/C:L/I:L/A:L) CVEID:   CVE-2018-12547 DESCRIPTION:   In Eclipse OpenJ9, prior to the 0.12.0 release, the jio\_snprintf() and jio\_vsnprintf() native methods ignored the length parameter. This affects existing APIs that called the functions to exceed the allocated buffer. This functions were not directly callable by non-native user code.CVSS Base score: 9.8CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/2RgEbhT for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:L/PR:N/UI:N/S:U/C:H/I:H/A:H) CVEID:   CVE-2018-11212 DESCRIPTION:   An issue was discovered in libjpeg 9a. The alloc\_sarray function in jmemmgr.c allows remote attackers to cause a denial of service (divide-by-zero error) via a crafted file.CVSS Base score: 3.3CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/2QhhV7b for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:L/AC:L/PR:N/UI:R/S:U/C:N/I:N/A:L) CVEID:   CVE-2019-2422 DESCRIPTION:   Vulnerability in the Java SE component of Oracle Java SE (subcomponent: Libraries). Supported versions that are affected are Java SE: 7u201, 8u192 and 11.0.1; Java SE Embedded: 8u191. Difficult to exploit vulnerability allows unauthenticated attacker with network access via multiple protocols to compromise Java SE. Successful attacks require human interaction from a person other than the attacker. Successful attacks of this vulnerability can result in unauthorized read access to a subset of Java SE accessible data. Note: This vulnerability applies to Java deployments, typically in clients running sandboxed Java Web Start applications or sandboxed Java applets (in Java SE 8), that load and run untrusted code (e.g., code that comes from the internet) and rely on the Java sandbox for security. This vulnerability does not apply to Java deployments, typically in servers, that load and run only trusted code (e.g., code installed by an administrator). CVSS 3.0 Base Score 3.1 (Confidentiality impacts). CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:H/PR:N/UI:R/S:U/C:L/I:N/A:N).CVSS Base score: 3.1CVSS Temporal Score: See: https://ift.tt/2OenKja for the current score.CVSS Vector: (CVSS:3.0/AV:N/AC:H/PR:N/UI:R/S:U/C:L/I:N/A:N) [...read more](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/psirt/security-bulletin-security-vulnerabilities-have-been-identified-in-ibm-java-runtime-as-shipped-with-tivoli-federated-identity-manager/)

  
  
from IBM Product Security Incident Response Team https://ift.tt/34HNA65